if you are learning about options
assignment might seem like a very scary
topic in this video you will learn that
it really isn't I will break down the
entire options assignment process step
by step and show you when you might get
assigned how to minimize the risk of
getting assigned and what to do if you
do get assigned with that being said
let's jump right into it first of all
what is assignment to understand
assignment we must first remember what
options allow you to do a call option
gives its buyer the right to buy 100
shares of the underlying asset at the
strike price whereas a put option gives
its owner the right to sell at 100
shares of the underlying asset at the
strike price in other words cool options
allow you to call away
shares from someone else whereas a put
option allows you to put shares in
someone else's account the assignment is
the selection of the other party of this
transaction so the person that has to
buy from or sell it to the option buyer
that exercised their option
note that an option buyer has the right
to exercise his or her option it is not
an obligation and therefore a buyer of
an option can never get assigned it's
only when you are short an option in
position that you can get assigned let's
go through a specific example to clarify
this stock ABC is trading at 100 dollars
and Peter decides to buy one put option
with a strike price of 95 as a hedge for
his long stock position in ABC Kate
simultaneously sells this option over
the next few weeks
ABC's price goes down to 90 dollars and
Peter decides to exercise his put option
this means that he uses his right to
sell 100 shares of ABC for $95 per share
now Kate is assigned this 100 shares of
ABC which means she is obligated to buy
them for nine
five dollars per share Peter now has 100
fewer shares of ABC in his portfolio
whereas Kate has 100 more this process
is analog for a call option with the
only difference being that Kate would be
short 100 shares and Peter would have
100 additional shares of ABC in his
account you now hopefully know what
assignment is but who actually gets
assigned to answer this question we must
first ask ourselves who exercises their
options there are three different
possibilities to close a long option
position the first would be to simply
sell the option this has no consequences
for the option seller the next
alternative would be to let the option
expire if it's out of the money it will
expire worthless and they would be again
no consequences for the option seller if
however the option is in the money by
more than 0.01 dollars it will usually
be automatically exercised the last
possibility would be to exercise the
option early this is only possible for
american-style options so as an option
seller you only have to worry about the
last two possibilities in which the
buyers option is exercised just to calm
you fears
here's a quick fact about the
distribution of these three alternatives
less than 10% of all options are
exercised so 90% of options are either
sold prior to the expiration date or
expire worthless
this means that assignment risk isn't
exactly large it is very easy to avoid
the first case of getting assigned just
close your short option positions before
they expire for the second case however
things aren't a straightforward let's
recap who risks being assigned early
firstly they have to be trading
american-style
options european-style options can only
be exercised on their expiration date
but most equity options are
american-style anyway
secondly you need to be selling options
option buyers can't get assigned these
two are necessary conditions for you to
get assigned everyone who fulfills both
of these conditions risks getting
assigned early the size of this risk
however varies depending on your
position here are a few things that can
dramatically increase your assignment
risk if your option is in the money the
chance of getting assigned is much
higher than if it's not from the
standpoint of an option buyer it does
not make sense to exercise an option
that's not in the money because this
would lead to a loss nevertheless it is
still possible the deep you in the money
the option is the higher the assignment
risk becomes besides that selling
options on securities with upcoming
dividends also increases your risk of
assignment more specifically if the
intrinsic value of an in the money call
option is less than the amount of the
dividend options buyers can achieve a
profit by exercising their option before
the ex-dividend date otherwise keep an
eye on the extrinsic value of your
option if the option has extrinsic value
left it doesn't make sense for the
option buyer to exercise their option
because they would achieve a higher
profit if theirs are so adoption and
then boards or sold shares of the
underlying asset the less time and
option is left the lower its extrinsic
value becomes last but not least put
options tend to get exercised more often
than cool options but this shouldn't
affect your trading so how can you
minimize assignment risk first don't
sell options on securities with upcoming
dividend payments second close your
option positions early the closer you
get to expiration the less time value
your option has left and especially for
deep in the money options it's good
practice to close your position before
expiration week to avoid assignment if
you don't want to close your position
you could
also just roll it out to a later
expiration cycle to increase the
extrinsic value of the option otherwise
there really isn't that much you can do
before we move on to the conclusion I
want to answer some frequently asked
questions about option exercise and
assignment first what is if your account
does not have enough buying power for
the assigned shares this is a common
worry for beginning options traders but
don't worry if you don't have enough
capital to cover the new position you
will receive a margin call and usually
your broker will just automatically
close the assign shares immediately this
might lead to a minor assignment fee but
otherwise it won't significantly affect
your account
taystee works for instance charges an
assignment fee of only $5 check out my
review of tasty works in the description
box below
- how does assignment affect your P&L
this is another thing many beginning
options traders worry about when an
option is exercised the option holder
gains the difference between the strike
price and the price of the underlying
assets if the options in the money this
is exactly the intrinsic value of the
option this means that the option holder
loses the extrinsic value when he
exercises his or her option that's also
why it doesn't make sense to exercise
options with a lot of extrinsic value
left this means that as soon as the
option is exercised is only the
intrinsic value that's relevant this is
the same P&L as the option has at its
expiration date so as an option seller
your P&L isn't negatively affected from
an assignment either it stays the same
would become slightly better due to the
extrinsic value being ignored for
instance if your option is $1.00 in the
money you will lose up to $100 per
option or $1.00 per share that you get
assigned
but this would be the PNL of the option
at expiration
anyway depending on how much premium you
collected when selling the option this
might still be a profit or a minor loss
with that being said as soon as you get
assigned the shares of the underlying
security you will have some carrying
risk if you don't or can't close the
position immediately you will be exposed
to the ongoing price fluctuations of
that security sometimes you might not be
able to close the new position
immediately because of trading holes or
because the market is closed if you
weren't planning on holding the security
it's a good idea to close the new
position as soon as possible option
spreads such as vertical spreads add
protection to these price fluctuations
since you can just exercise an
unassigned long option to close the sign
share position at the strike price of
the long option 3 when an option holder
exercises their option how is the
assignment partner chosen this is
usually a random process first the
exchange randomly choose a firm that has
accounts that have an open short
position in that option then the firm
chooses which of these accounts gets
assigned this choice is typically either
random or the account that first saw the
option is chosen for last but not least
how does assignment work for index
options as there aren't any shares of
indexes you can't directly be assigned
any shares of the underlying asset
therefore index options are cash-settled
this means that instead of having to buy
yourself shares of the underlying you
simply have to pay the difference
between the strike price and the
underlying trading price this makes
index option assignment a lot less
worrisome now let us move on to the
conclusion
hopefully this video shows you that
assignment isn't as bad as it seems at
first it's just important to understand
how the options assignment process works
and what effects likelihood of getting
assigned to recap here's what you should
do when you are assigned if you have
enough capital in your account to cover
the position you could either treat the
new position as a normal stock position
and hold on to it or you could just
close it immediately if you don't have a
clear plan for the new position
I recommend the latter if you don't have
enough buying power you will receive a
margin call from your broker and the
position should be closed automatically
getting assigned does not have any
direct significant impact on your P&L
but it comes with some carrying risk
option spreads can offer more protection
against this The Naked option positions
to mitigate assignment risk you should
close option positions early always keep
an eye on the extrinsic value of your
option positions and avoid upcoming
dividend securities and always remember
less than 10 percent of options are
exercised so assignment really doesn't
happen that often especially not if
you're actively trying to avoid it for
the specifics of how assignment is
handled it's a good idea to contact your
broker as the procedures can vary from
broker to broker with that being said I
want to thank you for watching this
video
and I really hope it clarified the topic
of assignment if you enjoyed the video
make sure to LIKE subscribe and turn on
the notification bar thank you
you